Adding documentation for Microsoft Fabric VS Code experience for data science (#8946)
microsoft/vscode-docs: docs/datascience/microsoft-fabric-quickstart.md

---
ContentId: 99a5d36e-ce14-4040-b1cf-7345b7fa2c7d
DateApproved: 9/21/2025
MetaDescription: Get started with Microsoft Fabric extensions for Visual Studio Code to develop data engineering and analytics solutions
MetaSocialImage: images/datascience/fabric-social.png
---

# Microsoft Fabric Extensions for Visual Studio Code

> ## Overview

Reviewer: Leave a reply as @asrar-mared

| **Fabric User data functions** | Developers building custom transformations & workflows | - Author serverless functions in Fabric<br>- Local debugging with breakpoints<br>- Manage data source connections<br>- Install/manage Python libraries<br>- Deploy functions directly to Fabric workspace | You build automation or data transformation logic and need debugging + deployment from VS Code. | [Develop User data function in VS code](https://learn.microsoft.com/fabric/data-engineering/user-data-functions/create-user-data-functions-vs-code)|
| **Fabric Data Engineering** | Data engineers working with large-scale data & Spark | - Explore Lakehouses (tables, raw files)<br>- Develop/debug Spark notebooks<br>- Build/test Spark job definitions<br>- Sync notebooks between local VS Code & Fabric<br>- Preview schemas & sample data | You work with Spark, Lakehouses, or large-scale data pipelines and want to explore, develop, and debug locally. | [Develop Fabric notebooks in VS Code](https://learn.microsoft.com/fabric/data-engineering/setup-vs-code-extension)

> |

Reviewer: Leave a reply

## Getting started
Once you have the extensions installed and signed in, you can start working with Fabric workspaces and items. In the Command Palette `(Ctrl+Shift+P)`, type **Fabric** to list the commands that are specific to Microsoft Fabric.

> ![Microsoft Fabric commands](images/microsoft-fabric/fabric-command-palette.png)

Reviewer 2: Update alt text

## Fabric Workspace and items explorer

The Fabric extensions provide a seamless way to work with both remote and local Fabric items.

> - In the Fabric extension, you'll see a **Fabric Workspaces** section that displays all items from your remote workspace, organized by type (Lakehouses, Notebooks, Pipelines, etc.).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- In the Fabric extension, the **Fabric Workspaces** section lists all items from your remote workspace, organized by type (Lakehouses, Notebooks, Pipelines, and more).
```

> - In the Fabric extension, you'll see a **Local folder** section that displays a Fbric item(s) folder opened in VS Code. It reflects the structure of your fabric item definition for each type that is opened in VS Code. This allows you develop locally and publish your changes to current or new workspace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- In the Fabric extension, the **Local folder** section shows a Fabric item(s) folder opened in VS Code. It reflects the structure of your fabric item definition for each type that is opened in VS Code. This enables you to develop locally and publish your changes to current or new workspace.
```

> ![View your workspaces and items?](images/microsoft-fabric/view-workspaces-and-items.png)

Reviewer 2: Alt text

## Use user data functions for data science

> 1. In the Command Palette `(Ctrl+Shift+P)`, type **Fabric: Create Item**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. In the Command Palette (`kb(workbench.action.showCommands)`), type **Fabric: Create Item**.
```

2. Select your workspace and select **User data function**. Provide a name and select **Python** language.

> 3. You will be notificed to setup the Python virtual environment and continue to set this up locally.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. You are notified to set up the Python virtual environment and continue to set this up locally.
```

> 4. Install the libraries using `pip install` or select the user data function item in Fabric extension to add libraries. Update the `requirements.txt` file to specify the dependencies:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Install the libraries using `pip install` or select the user data function item in the Fabric extension to add libraries. Update the `requirements.txt` file to specify the dependencies:
```

    ```txt
    fabric-user-data-functions ~= 1.0
    pandas == 2.3.1
    numpy == 2.3.2
    requests == 2.32.5
    scikit-learn=1.2.0
    joblib=1.2.0
    ```

> 4. Open `functions_app.py` and

Reviewer 2: Is something missing?

> Here's an example of developing a User Data Function for data science using scikit-learn:

Reviewer 2: Should this be indented under the numbered list item?

        'features': numeric_features,
        'message': f'Model trained with {len(X_train)} samples and {accuracy:.2%} accuracy'
    }

@udf.function()
def predict_churn(customer_data: list) -> list:
    '''
    Description: Predict customer churn using trained Random Forest model.

    Args:
    - customer_data (list): List of dictionaries containing customer features for prediction
      Example: [{"Age": 30, "Income": 60000}, {"Age": 55, "Income": 80000}]

    Returns: list: Customer data with churn predictions and probability scores
    '''
    # Load saved model and scaler
    model = joblib.load('churn_model.pkl')
    scaler = joblib.load('scaler.pkl')

    # Convert to DataFrame and scale features
    df = pd.DataFrame(customer_data)
    X_scaled = scaler.transform(df)

    # Make predictions
    predictions = model.predict(X_scaled)
    probabilities = model.predict_proba(X_scaled)[:, 1]

    # Add predictions to original data
    results = customer_data.copy()
    for i, (pred, prob) in enumerate(zip(predictions, probabilities)):
        results[i]['churn_prediction'] = int(pred)
        results[i]['churn_probability'] = float(prob)

    return results
```

> 6. Test your functions locally, by pressing `F5`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. Test your functions locally, by pressing `kbstyle(F5)`.
```

> 7. In Fabric extension,in **Local folder** , select the function and publish to your the workspace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
7. In the Fabric extension, in **Local folder** , select the function and publish to your workspace.
```

> ![Publish your user data funtions item](./images/microsoft-fabric/publish-user-data-function.png)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    ![Publish your user data funtions item](./images/microsoft-fabric/publish-user-data-function.png)
```

Learn more about invoking the function from:

> 1. [Fabric Data pipelines](https://learn.microsoft.com/fabric/data-engineering/user-data-functions/create-functions-activity-data-pipelines)

Reviewer 2: These should probably be bulleted list items or is there a specific order?

2. [Fabric Notebooks](https://learn.microsoft.com/fabric/data-engineering/notebook-utilities#user-data-function-udf-utilities)
3. [An external application](https://learn.microsoft.com/fabric/data-engineering/user-data-functions/tutorial-invoke-from-python-app)

## Use Fabric notebooks for data science

> A Fabric notebook is an interactive workbook in Microsoft Fabric for writing and running code, visualizations, and markdown side-by-side. Notebooks support multiple languages (Python, Spark, SQL, Scala and more) and are ideal for data exploration, transformation, and model development in Fabric working with your existing data in OneLake.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Fabric notebook is an interactive workbook in Microsoft Fabric for writing and running code, visualizations, and markdown side-by-side. Notebooks support multiple languages (Python, Spark, SQL, Scala, and more) and are ideal for data exploration, transformation, and model development in Fabric working with your existing data in OneLake.
```

The cell below reads a CSV with Spark, converts it to pandas, and trains a logistic regression model with scikit-learn. Replace column names and path with your dataset values.

```python
def train_logistic_from_spark(spark, csv_path):
    # Read CSV with Spark, convert to pandas
    sdf = spark.read.option("header", "true").option("inferSchema", "true").csv(csv_path)
    df = sdf.toPandas().dropna()

    # Adjust these to match your dataset
    X = df[['feature1', 'feature2']]
    y = df['label']

    from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
    from sklearn.linear_model import LogisticRegression
    from sklearn.metrics import accuracy_score

    X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(X, y, test_size=0.2, random_state=42)
    model = LogisticRegression(max_iter=200)
    model.fit(X_train, y_train)

    preds = model.predict(X_test)
    return {'accuracy': float(accuracy_score(y_test, preds))}

# Example usage in a Fabric notebook cell
# train_logistic_from_spark(spark, '/path/to/data.csv')
```

Refer to [Microsoft Fabric Notebooks](https://learn.microsoft.com/fabric/data-engineering/how-to-use-notebook) documentation to learn more.

## Git integration

> Microsoft Fabric supports Git integration that enables seamless version control and collaboration across data and analytics projects. You can connect a Fabric workspace to Git repositories—primarily Azure DevOps or GitHub and only supported items are synced. The integration supports CI/CD workflows, allowing teams to manage releases efficiently and maintain high-quality analytics environments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Microsoft Fabric supports Git integration that enables version control and collaboration across data and analytics projects. You can connect a Fabric workspace to Git repositories, primarily Azure DevOps or GitHub, and only supported items are synced. This integration also supports CI/CD workflow to enable teams to manage releases efficiently and maintain high-quality analytics environments.
```

> ![Git integration demo for User data functions](./images/microsoft-fabric/fabric-git-integration.gif)

Reviewer 2: Alt text

## Next steps

Now that you have Microsoft Fabric extensions set up in VS Code, explore these resources to deepen your knowledge:

### Learn more about Microsoft Fabric
* [Learn about Microsoft Fabric for Data Science](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/fabric/data-science/tutorial-data-science-introduction).
* [Set up your Fabric trial capacity](https://learn.microsoft.com/fabric/fundamentals/fabric-trial)
* [Microsoft Fabric fundamentals](https://learn.microsoft.com/fabric/fundamentals/fabric-overview)

### Community and support

* [Microsoft Fabric community forums](https://community.fabric.microsoft.com/)
* [Fabric samples and templates](https://github.com/microsoft/fabric-samples)

> * [VS Code marketplace reviews and feedback](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-fabric.vscode-fabric)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [Visual Studio Marketplace reviews and feedback](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-fabric.vscode-fabric)
```
